How do you feel when you miss a meal
or haven’t eaten for some time?
You know, for many it affects their mood,
their ability to concentrate,
sometimes their ability
to even think straight.
But what if that hunger
was beyond our control
or prolonged to the point where we
had no other choice but to be hungry.
Well, that was the situation
that the apostle Paul found himself in
as he engaged in his ministry.
For example,
at 2 Corinthians 11:27, Paul said
that he was “in hunger and thirst,
[and] frequently without food.”
This likely occurred while Paul was traveling
through desolate regions or hot desert areas.
At times, he may have been hungry and thirsty
because of being dependent on strangers
or on whatever provisions
he could obtain through his own labors
in unfamiliar surroundings.
Paul also lived
during the time of a great famine
—a famine which lasted
more than three years
and caused oppressive poverty
in Judea and Jerusalem.
But despite facing
all these times without food,
it’s interesting to note
the attitude of the apostle Paul.
At 2 Corinthians 6:10,
he describes himself
and his fellow Christians
“as sorrowing
but ever rejoicing.”
So Paul acknowledged that difficult times
could bring a measure of sorrow and distress.
But how was he able to rejoice
—to have this inner joy—
despite his hunger?
Well, notice his answer.
Turn with me in your Bibles,
please, to the book of Philippians.
And we’re going to read
Philippians chapter 4,
verses 11-13.
Paul says: “Not that I am saying this
because I am in need,
“for I have learned to be self-sufficient
regardless of my circumstances.
“I know how to be low on provisions
and how to have an abundance.
“In everything and in all circumstances
“I have learned the secret
of both how to be full and how to hunger,
“both how to have an abundance
and how to do without.
“For all things I have the strength
through the one who gives me power.”
Did you note that in verse 12,
Paul speaks of learning “the secret
of both how to be full and how to hunger”?
This secret involves relying on Jehovah
for life’s necessities and being satisfied
with whatever he provides.
And Paul certainly did that.
He learned a trade to support himself
so as not to be a burden to others.
He was fully occupied with his ministry,
so he had few material possessions.
But he was grateful for the brotherhood.
He was appreciative of what those brothers
were able to provide—what he needed.
Paul learned
through each of these experiences.
And as he saw Jehovah’s hand in his life,
it became apparent to him
that no matter what the circumstances were,
he had to look to Jehovah
to satisfy his needs.
Did you notice verse 13?
Jehovah sustained Paul.
He gave him power.
So when Paul did face
those adverse circumstances,
he was still able to be content,
maintain inner joy,
and carry out his ministry.
Well, what can you and I
learn from Paul’s example?
It may be that we too might face
hunger for a variety of reasons.
For example, food shortages
—this could result from civil unrest
or an economic crisis.
World events today
have caused many to lose their jobs
around the world,
including our brothers.
So a personal economic setback
may force us to live on less.
Hunger can also result from persecution.
When many of our brothers
were put in Nazi concentration camps,
depriving them of adequate food
was one of the diabolical methods used
in an effort to break their integrity.
And even when it comes
to theocratic pursuits,
some who move to serve where the need
is greater are forced to make adjustments
and must learn to be content with less.
So, really, in any number of situations,
you and I could experience a lack of food
or even hunger,
and that could make us
feel anxious and distressed.
But the antidote is trust
and reliance on Jehovah.
You know, when we do that,
it helps us to remain calm
and to take things one day at a time.
When inflation hit in his country,
one father said,
“My daily prayer was simply
that God would ‘give us today
“our bread for this day’
in order for us to survive.”
We must also be grateful
for whatever Jehovah provides.
When that same father went to the food line
to purchase items,
he said that one time
the only thing they had left
was something he didn’t like.
Well, what did he do?
He said: “I didn’t like it,
“but it was food.
So that’s what we ate that night.”
And he was grateful
to Jehovah for providing it.
You know, perhaps right now,
we may be in a position
where we only eat what we like.
But if circumstances change,
could we adjust and still be grateful?
Isn’t it reassuring that we
are cared for by a God
who gives us what we need?
And, of course, it is important that we
utilize the resources Jehovah provides.
We’d like you to watch the following video.
As you do, note which provisions
helped our sister to rejoice
despite experiencing hunger.
Well, here in Venezuela,
long before the crisis,
there weren’t so many financial problems
like we have today.
We could go to the stores, we could buy
the amount of food we wanted,
and life was peaceful.
For us,
the situation started to get really bad
five years ago.
It was hard to get any food at all,
even basic items.
When it came time to buy something,
well, it was all gone.
There were two elders that,
I can say,
were checking on me almost daily
—always asking
how much food I needed.
When I prepared it and served it,
my main concern
was that my children would get enough.
I always gave them more food.
Even though
my youngest boy would ask,
“Mommy, is that
what you’re going to eat?”
I would tell him,
“Yes, dear, I’m fine with this.”
Then he would say,
“I don’t think so.”
I would think, ‘I can handle this,’
but the amount that I was eating
just wasn’t enough for my body.
One Sunday morning, during the meeting,
I wasn’t feeling very well but,
thanks to Jehovah,
my daughter was nearby.
When I came to, she said,
“Mom, you fainted three times!”
I said, “That can’t be!”
So the brothers
immediately took me to the doctor.
I was diagnosed
as having severe malnutrition.
The brothers began a plan of action:
They brought food
that was already prepared
and, in fact, they would sit
by me until I finished my food.
I have not yet
fully recovered my body weight,
because I was a little heavier.
But healthwise,
I have felt very well.
The elders were always looking after me,
and that boosted my energy.
And definitely,
I never lost my joy.
And it’s all thanks to Jehovah!
Thanks to him because he
is the One who sustains me.
He clothes me, he feeds me,
and he gives me great friends.
That is what Jehovah gives me.
Did you notice the provisions
that helped our sister?
First, her relationship with Jehovah
—she saw the importance
of staying close to him
and regularly attending her meetings
—and then, of course, the brotherhood.
Wasn’t it comforting to see
how attentive the elders were,
making daily checks on her,
providing food for her and her family,
and even making sure
she ate enough as well?
Well, it’s these same provisions
—maintaining our relationship with Jehovah,
receiving relief from the brotherhood,
as well as holding fast to our hope
—that can help us to rejoice
despite any periods of hunger.
We agree.
We are fully convinced
of what Paul said at Philippians 4:12.
Jehovah can and does
provide life’s necessities
in all circumstances.
When facing hunger,
it is natural to be concerned
for our own welfare
and that of our loved ones.
And yet, as we’ve seen,
it is possible to rejoice
despite any hunger we may experience.
But the key?
Learn the secret.
Everyone likes to be in on a secret,
and Jehovah is more than happy
to reveal this one to us,
but we must rely on him
and see how he acts in our behalf.
How pleased Jehovah must be
when his servants remain
loyal and joyful, trusting
that he will never abandon them!
Brother Robert Luccioni,
a helper to the Publishing Committee,
will now present
the next talk of the symposium,
“We Can Rejoice
Despite . . . Nakedness.”